Phabricator: [T376971](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T376971)

Status: Discussing

Date: October 31, 2024

# Problem statement

A chart is rendered by a Node.js library Apache eCharts. It is currently optimized for desktop browsers, so on mobile browsers displays with illegible text. We need to be able to render charts in a way that is optimized to the user's current device.

# Decision outcome

A decision was made after consulting decision drivers and thinking about the future features we would like to build. After consulting with Chris (our product manager) and Derek (our designer) it
seems inevitable that at some point we want to utilize the Apache eCharts library on the client to address issues such as additional localization
(e.g. on English Wikipedia we might want to localize charts to the interface language); data exploration (e.g. tooltips on data points and zooming); and switching display format
(e.g. switching from line chart to other forms of chart)

* We will update the service to render in a way that optimizes for mobile (e.g. mobile first) likely this will be 400x600px (currently we optimize for 1000x600) - this will ensure that apps get a good experience without needing to build anything out as Wikipedia apps tend to be used on tablet and mobile devices. The downside of this is that charts will appear smaller than the available space on desktop.
* To resolve the previous issue, we'll load the echarts library on the client. This will progressively enhance the SVGs.
* The apache echarts library will be added to the client in a way that it is not publicly accessible to gadgets and scripts as we do not want to expose ourselves to the security vulnerabilities that Extension:Graph ran into. At a later date if we decide to add support for gadgets we will do so using a suitable and safe abstraction but this is out of scope for our MVP. Doing this will allow us to gain the benefits of the Apache eCharts library on the client and enable future features / fix existing bugs such as internationalization.
* The service currently outputs an SVG. We will update it to output `<wiki-chart data-spec="{}"><svg></wikichart>` - a data attribute would provide the spec for re-recreation of the chart on the client. This is important as it allows us to keep the client and server calls identical for consistency without having to duplicate code.
* The extension would load the charts library when charts scroll into view. This is important from a performance perspective as it avoids loading a large JavaScript dependency on page load.
* There must be no performance-penalty via layout changes when a chart is hydrated. This will be achieved by applying identical rendering on the client and server and always rendering
  at the same height. For desktop,the containing wiki-chart element will render charts at full width of its parent container, despite the smaller SVG to allow expansion.
* We do not want the new feature to support the creation of charts inside templates via a wiki-chart and data-spec element as this would create a security vulnerability. To avoid this the client will check that the element has come from the server by checking for the existence of a data-mw attribute (which can only be outputted by the server) and will only enhance charts that exist on article page load (e.g. not via additional script tags).
* Since this increases the scope of the security review we will feature flag this addition so that in the event of problems it can easily be disabled/delayed during our pilot launch.

# Remaining concerns
* The apache echarts library is 300kb. While we can pull this library in only when needed (e.g. when a chart is scrolled to view) we will explore options for a reduced size payload.
  During the discussion Katie Filbert pointed out https://apache.github.io/echarts-handbook/en/how-to/cross-platform/server/ for future follow up.
* The status of this decision will remain in "discussing" and will be followed up on post-security review. We will feature flag the client side hydration to allow us
  to separate the decision of hydration from intial pilot launch.

# Decision drivers

* The solution should optimize charts for mobile and desktop views.
* The solution should not delay our pilot wiki deployment.
* The solution should support the Wikipedia official app without having to add any additional dependencies
* We do not want to create new security vulnerabilities
* The solution should not create additional work for us e.g. dark mode support.
* The solution should not cause layout delays both when no charts are in view "above the fold" and when something will need re-rendering
* The solution should be limited to pages which have charts. A page without Charts should not be impacted from a performance perspective
* The visual editor / and editor preview should be consistent at all times with how the chart will display to user, reducing editing uncertainty in how their charts
* will appear to other users.

# Other options considered

## Option 1: We add CSS to increase font size of labels

Dismissed after talking with @DTorsani-WMF as responsiveness is more than just making labels display - ideally we would like number of points to be reduced based on size of chart.
https://gerrit.wikimedia.org/r/c/mediawiki/extensions/Chart/+/1079369

##  Option 2: We modify the SVG response using Xml library

This would have allowed us to  workaround and upstream a bug fix to the apache echarts library to fix https://github.com/apache/echarts/issues/10724.

This was dismissed because this our success would involve a dependency on a 3rd party project with no guarantee of success and possible issues when updating the Charts library and our timeline is tight.

## Option 3: Use a picture element with multiple chart URLs

Dismissed because if we use an img tag and href instead of an inline SVG we would need multiple permetations of charts (different resolutions, different ones for dark mode/non-dark mode). It would not be compatible with how dark mode works on Vector 2022 and Minerva skins.

A proof of concept is described here: https://gist.github.com/jdlrobson/f44c6a1666dde1e215e0cdf9cb6ed2c6

### Option 4: Render two SVG images and display the only one for mobile desktop.

Dismissed because this would be hacky and could lead to display of at least 2 SVGs in some clients and would double the work of the service as it would need to output more than 1 chart.
