Phabricator: [T375574](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T375574)

Status: Accepted

Date: November 6th, 2024

# Problem statement

Charts currently do not localize dates. Dates are data and represented currently as strings so cannot be localized in the same way as legends.

# Decision outcome

We decided to interpret any string in the form YYYY-MM-DD as a date and to provide basic localization for dates. This is intuitive, involves the least amount of work on our side and very little additional code. It would also be easy for editors to adapt existing data to be compatible with this format (via find and replace functions in text editors) which would lead to different data sources representing dates consistently.

# Decision drivers

* The solution shouldn't increase the scope of the security review.
* The solution should be easy to apply to the service and hydration layer.
* The solution should support the Wikipedia official app without having to add any additional dependencies
* The solution should be easy to undo at a later date.
* The solution should be inutitive to editors.

# Options considered

## Option 1: We update JsonConfig to support a new date type.

Dismissed (for now) after talking with team as this would require careful consideration of how to handle dates in other formats and dates which include time.

##  Option 2: We do not provide support

Editors can duplicate charts and change the data to achieve the same goal. Dismissed as this would create lots of unnecessary data pages in Wikimedia Commons that would be difficult to deduplicate.

## Option 3: Infer types from the string format (chosen solution)

Selected as it was the easiest way to add support for date localization and support can be easily retracted at a later date.
