Phabricator [T388579](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T388579)

Status: Accepted

Date: April 10, 2025

# Problem statement

We aim to make a flexible system that allows our editors to be creative and implement complex tools on top of the standard data storage and chart rendering we provide. In particular, we want content authors to be able to procedurally modify or generate tabular datasets as a transformation pipeline on their way into the chart renderer.

Examples of transform modules that could be created and maintained by power users:

* unit conversions
* statistical processing (sums, averages, etc)
* reformatting input data
* combining multiple datasets (column or row appends)
* extracting from large datasets (column or row subsets)
* procedural generation of mathematical datasets
* one-off or configurable mashups combining data from different table layouts

The previous `Graphs` system allowed for tabular data to be loaded and modified extensively in both Lua modules for template usage and in JavaScript, but the JavaScript side was considered too dangerous to keep using as-is from a security standpoint and the Lua side had to export JSON manually to the renderer.

# Decision outcome

We are implementing a transform layer in JsonConfig for `Data:` pages via an extension of the existing Lua interface, and exposing transform selection into the `Data:*.chart` chart format pages in Charts, so each individual chart may use its own sandboxed Lua code for transforming and modifying data.

A map of arguments can be passed down from the `Data:*.chart` JSON like so:

```mediawiki
{{#chart:Weekly average temperatures.chart
|data=Weekly temperatures in Los Angeles, California.tab
}}

{{#chart:Weekly average temperatures (F).chart
|data=Weekly temperatures in Los Angeles, California.tab
}}
```

with a `Data:Weekly average temperatures (C).chart` and `Data:Weekly average temperatures (F).chart` JSON pages including a transform reference for each variant:

```json
{
	"license": "CC0-1.0",
	"version": 1,
	"type": "bar",
	"xAxis": {
		"title": {
			"en": "Day"
		}
	},
	"yAxis": {
		"title": {
			"en": "Temperature (C)"
		}
	},
	"source": "Sample weekly temperature dataset.tab",
	"transform": {
		"module": "Weekly average temperature chart",
		"function": "convert_temps",
		"args": {
			"columns": [ "low", "high" ],
			"units": "C"
		}
	}
}
```

```json
{
	"license": "CC0-1.0",
	"version": 1,
	"type": "bar",
	"xAxis": {
		"title": {
			"en": "Day"
		}
	},
	"yAxis": {
		"title": {
			"en": "Temperature (F)"
		}
	},
	"source": "Sample weekly temperature dataset.tab",
	"transform": {
		"module": "Weekly average temperature chart",
		"function": "convert_temps",
		"args": {
			"columns": [ "low", "high" ],
			"units": "F"
		}
	}
}
```

The sample data set:

```json
{
	"license": "CC0-1.0",
	"description": {
		"en": "Sample monthly temperature data"
	},
	"schema": {
		"fields": [
			{
				"name": "month",
				"type": "localized",
				"title": {
					"en": "Month"
				}
			},
			{
				"name": "low",
				"type": "number",
				"title": {
					"en": "Low"
				}
			},
			{
				"name": "high",
				"type": "number",
				"title": {
					"en": "High"
				}
			}
		]
	},
	"data": [
		[
			{
				"en": "January"
			},
			5,
			20
		],
		[
			{
				"en": "July"
			},
			15,
			30
		]
	]
}
```

and a `Module:Weekly average temperature chart` Lua module something like:

```lua
local p = {}

local function celsius_to_fahrenheit(val)
	return val * 1.8 + 32
end

function p.convert_temps(tab, args)
	if args.units == "C" then
		-- Stored data is in Celsius
		return tab
	elseif args.units == "F" then
		-- Have to convert if asked for Fahrenheit
		for i, field in ipairs(tab.schema.fields) do
			for _, column in ipairs(args.columns) do
				if field.name == column then
					for _, row in ipairs(tab.data) do
						row[i] = celsius_to_fahrenheit(row[i])
					end
				end
			end
		end
		return tab
	else
		error("Units must be either 'C' or 'F'")
	end
end

return p

```

This will be exposed internally via `JCSingleton::getContent()` with new `$options` parameter that can include a `transform` key with the relevant transform reference.

The JSON data of the `Data:` page is converted to a Lua table, as when calling explicitly `mw.ext.data.get()`, and the transform function returns it with any modifications to be converted back to JSON on the PHP side before it goes out to the requester. This is a clean separation of the transform from the rendering output, and doesn't require any manual JSON formatting or string manipulation like Graphs did.

Note that as with other wiki resources like templates and images and the tabular data sets, Lua modules can be edited out from under you -- if a previously-working chart invocation becomes invalid it will start falling over gracefully to showing a rendering error. Conditions like a missing or invalid Lua `Module:` page, or a missing/invalid function must be handled gracefully in this way, as will execution errors in the Lua environment. These will become detectable through the rendering error category for maintenance bots etc to flag.

To be consistent with the centralization of the `Data:` pages themselves, Lua modules are loaded and executed in the context of the wiki that is the data store (Commons on Wikimedia production systems). This has several advantages over executing them on the client wiki side:

* no need to duplicate modules used across multiple wikis/languages
* `Data:` and `Module:` pages live on the same wiki, simplifying editing/cross-linking/permissions management
* a shared repository encourages sharing of common code and localization among power users editing the transform functions
* compared to a remote fetch and local execution, encapsulating transforms on the centralized wiki means that the Lua functions are free to use shared code and data in additional `Module:` pages

Internally, when `JCSingleton::getContent()` with a transform option is called, client wikis will make `action=jsondata` API requests to the store wiki asking for a specific `Data:` page to load, a Lua `Module:` page to load from, a function name to execute, and a set of named arguments to pass in.

The `action=jsondata` request will include a `jdtransform={...}` parameter with a JSON object with `module`, `function`, and `args` properties, where `module` and `function` are strings and `args` is an object or other valid JSON value to be converted to Lua and passed in as the second argument to the transform. Note this allows passing arrays and objects, which will appear as Lua tables, as well as numbers and strings.

When using `jdtransform`, this will push the actual data object into a `data` property under the `jsondata` result and add the others as in this example:

```json
{
	jsondata: {
		data: {
			// tabular dataset JSON structure
			// ...
		},

		// timestamp of the Data: page
		timestamp: "2025-03-12T19:54:59Z",

		// timestamp to expire the cached result, may be reduced if certain functions are used
		expires: "2025-03-13T19:54:59Z",

		// Entries to store into `globaljsonlinks` tables for cache invalidation
		dependencies: [
			// Module:Weekly_average_temperature_chart with the Lua code
			{ "namespace": 828, "title": "Weekly_average_temperature_chart" }
			// Other modules, and other Data-namespace pages, may appear here
			// if they are referenced suitably. Note that namespaces are given
			// as the raw internal numbers here for the tracking table, as it
			// may be non-obvious where the remote namespaces come from.
		]
	}
}
```

The Lua `Module:` page itself, and any other pages listed as touched in the parser output's `templatelinks`, will be recorded and passed back as dependencies for the client wiki to record in `globaljsonlinks` for dependency tracking. This will require slight code changes in JsonConfig to fully support `Module:` and other namespaces, but the schema is already prepared for it.

**NOTA BENE:** as with images loaded from Commons, chart format and tabular `Data:` pages, and any `Module:` pages loaded for Lua transforms are not automatically protected when a remote page uses them, and it's possible for an unprotected dependency to be edited on Commons, introducing errors, breakage, or vandalism to an otherwise-protected page. It is recommended that we make it easier to expose which dependency pages a given chart instance uses so they can be easily found and fixed/protected if necessary. This will be followed up on with a separate ADR proposal.

Current and expiration timestamps are included for cache management. Internally `JCCache` will handle the remote fetches, or the local executions through a `JCTransform` wrapper for the Lua execution environment.

(Remote transforms could be exposed to Lua `Module:` code as well in `mw.ext.data.get()` as an optional parameter, if it would be useful to expose centralized transform code to client wikis' modules as well. However this has not yet been specced and needs to be guarded against recursion if implemented.)

Expensive function counts and dependencies should be transferred from the execution environment to the calling Parser if possible, however only dependencies are a hard requirement (the execution itself counts as an expensive function).

# Decision drivers

Lua execution is already well-sandboxed in MediaWiki's Scribunto extension, and we already have a way of exporting tabular data pages as table structures into Lua modules used for templates.

Adding a second place where Lua functions can be called doesn't significantly change our security surface; while this allows for arbitrary functions and parameters to be passed into any load, from a security perspective the API action (extension of `action=jsondata`) is roughly equivalent to the API allowing aribtrary wikitext parse requests, where they can pass in the text `{{#invoke:ModuleName|funcName|arg1|arg2}}`. The system will work through a Parser object and maintains all the same performance counters as invocations through parsing, so sandboxing and rate limiting should be able to apply cleanly.

(Note that null values in `Data:` JSON do not transfer very cleanly to Lua right now, as Lua does not allow for storing `nil` in tables and this can cause null cells in a tabular data set to crop off the row early. There are ways around this if we find it necessary to support null values explicitly, such as replacing it with a sigil value or empty table. This is not expected to be a major problem to work around if we do find we need it.)


# Other options considered

JavaScript-layer transforms were not seriously considered due to the difficulties of sandboxing arbitrary JavaScript in either browser or node contexts.

We considered a set of fixed filter functions which could be referenced by name and composed, but this did not seem flexible enough at best, and at worst would be creating our own domain-specific language.

We considered making transform selection totally selectable at the `{{#chart:}}` invocation time as well, but there seems to be consensus that it's better to make the module/function selection in the chart JSON and put parameter overrides at the invocation.

By using the existing facilities in the MediaWiki family via Scribunto/Lua we can keep transform execution centralized and safe.
